Generic cross-reference design doc (#4366)
crossplane/crossplane: design/design-generic-references.md

# Generic Resource References

* Owner: Predrag Knezevic (@pedjak)
* Reviewers: Crossplane Maintainers
* Status: Draft

## Background

Crossplane providers provision and monitor external resources in third party
cloud providers, following the declared specification in the corresponding managed
resources. Very often, creation of these objects cannot happen in parallel, i.e. some
fields can be set only after a given dependency is created.

[Cross resource referencing] solves this problem for majority of cases by

> following [Kuberentes API object referemce] convention:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
following [Kuberentes API object reference] convention:
```

```yaml
spec:
  fooRef:
    name: bar
```

> Field `spec.fooRef` contains the name of resource where the value for `spec.foo` is to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Field `spec.fooRef` contains the name of the resource where the value for `spec.foo` is to
```

be found. The kind of referred resource and the field containing the value used later for
setting `spec.foo` is determined during compile time.

Although the used convention covers the majority of use cases, it lacks the
following properties:

* The referred object kind and the source field cannot be tuned/changed at 

>   runtime for a given object

Reviewer: Question: Purely for my own understanding, what would the difference be between "tuning" and "changing" the kind/source field at runtime?

Author: actually, they mean the same... thanks.

* The referencer field may not always target a single referred kind. For
  example, a URL field in Route53 could get populated by a URL of an S3 bucket
  or access endpoint of an RDS Instance
* The referencer field may not always target a single field in the referred
  object
* The value that is about to be assigned to the field require some sort of
  transformation

> Some of the above issues can be solved by defining a composition. However, there
> are cases where one would like to use and refer a resource not bound by a 
> composite instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some of the above issues can be solved by defining a composition. However, there
are cases where one would like to use and refer to a resource not bound by a 
composite instance.
```

> __**NOTE**__: there is 
> [a previous work on this topic](https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane/pull/2385).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
__**NOTE**__: [a prior design exists on this topic](https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane/pull/2385).
```

## Goals

The generic cross-reference should be able to:

> * be configurable at the runtime

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* be configurable at runtime
```

> * use the existing [Kuberentes API object referemce] convention 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* use the existing [Kuberentes API object reference] convention 
```

  as much as possible

> * provide alternative convention in cases where [Kuberentes API object referemce]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* provide alternative convention in cases where [Kuberentes API object reference]
```

  convention is not suitable

> * be implemented without or light changes in RBAC

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* be implemented without or requiring only light changes in RBAC
```

* support referring multiple objects (namespaced and cluster-scoped) and their
  fields
* support value transformation before assignment

## Proposal

> We would like to introduce a new cluster-scoped `Referable` (alternative name

Reviewer: Could you maybe touch on why this should be cluster-scope and not namespace-scoped?

Author: simply because all our types are cluster-scoped, iirc.

could be `InjectableValue`) type whose instances declare values that can be

> assigned to object field:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
assigned to an object field:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: apiextensions.crossplane.io/v1alpha1
kind: Referable
metadata:
  name: referable-vpc-id
spec:
  objects:
    - apiVersion: ec2.aws.crossplane.io/v1alpha1
      kind: VPC
      name: main-vpc
      fieldPath: status.atProvider.id
```

The syntax of `fieldPath` field is similar to what we
use in Composition, in line with [Kubernetes API Conventions on field selection].

After deploying the above instance to the cluster, its reconciliation gets 
triggered and once the referred object exists and the field is set, 
the referable value is emitted in the object status part:

```yaml
apiVersion: apiextensions.crossplane.io/v1alpha1
kind: Referable
metadata:
  name: referable-vpc-id
spec:
  objects:
    - apiVersion: ec2.aws.crossplane.io/v1alpha1
      kind: VPC
      name: main-vpc
      fieldPath: status.atProvider.id
status:
  value: foo-vpc-id # the value found in the requested field
  conditions:
    - type: Ready
      status: True
      reason: Available
```

Now, the value can be referred in the usual way within a managed resource:

```yaml
spec:
  vpcIdRef: referable-vpc-id
```

> The reference resolver could first try to find `referable-vpc-id` `VPC` instance, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reference resolver could first try to find a `referable-vpc-id` `VPC` instance, 
```

and fallback to `referable-vpc-id` `Referable` if the former does not exist. 
If the instance is ready, the value is read from `status.value` and 

> set to `spec.vpcId` of the managed resource. Ofcourse, if needed, and if it 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
set to `spec.vpcId` of the managed resource. Of course, if needed, and if it 
```

Reviewer: Under what circumstances might it be desired to look for the `Referable` object first?

makes more sense, the resolver could first look for the existence of `Referable` 
object first.

> Referring a namespaced object would be possible as well:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Referring to a namespaced object would be possible as well:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: apiextensions.crossplane.io/v1alpha1
kind: Referable
metadata:
  name: region
spec:
  objects:
    - apiVersion: v1
      kind: ConfigMap
      name: common-settings
      namespace: crossplane-system
      fieldPath: data.region
```

> or we could match an object with a label selector, if its name is unknown or not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or we could match an object with a label selector if its name is unknown or not
```

static:

```yaml
apiVersion: apiextensions.crossplane.io/v1alpha1
kind: Referable
metadata:
  name: referable-vpc-id
spec:
  objects:
    - apiVersion: ec2.aws.crossplane.io/v1alpha1
      kind: VPC
      matchingLabels:
        class: main-vpc
      fieldPath: status.atProvider.id
```

### Value Assigning Without Counterpart Ref Field

> If a value needs to be assigned to a field that does not have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a value needs to be assigned to a field that does not have a
```

corresponding `Ref` field, the reference can be expressed using `spec.refs` block:

```yaml
spec:
  refs:
    - name: referable-vpc-id
      toFieldPath: spec.myVPCId
```

> The syntax of `toFieldPath` field is similar to what we

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The syntax of the `toFieldPath` field is similar to what we
```

> use in Composition, in line [Kubernetes API Conventions on field selection].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
use in Composition, in line with the [Kubernetes API Conventions on field selection].
```

> Alternatively, if we would like to avoid changing managed resource schema, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, if we would like to avoid changing the managed resource schema, the
```

above can be stated using annotations as well:

```yaml
metadata:
  annotations:
    "referable.upbound.io/referable-vpc-id": "spec.myVPCId"
```

> ### Referring Value Existing Potentially in Multiple Source

Reviewer: It might be useful to refer to a real-world example that might lead to this scenario.

Author: sure, @turkenh or @haarchri do you have some better example from the field?

If a value could be found in multiple objects of different kinds, we can mark
them as optional and pick the value from the first one found:

```yaml
apiVersion: apiextensions.crossplane.io/v1alpha1
kind: Referable
metadata:
  name: multi-ref
spec:
  objects:
    - apiVersion: example.com/v1
      kind: Foo
      name: foo
      optional: true
      fieldPath: spec.id
    - apiVersion: example.com/v1
      kind: Bar
      name: bar
      optional: true
      fieldPath: spec.myId
```

The above syntax can be used as well when a value might appear in a several
places within single object.

> ### Value Transformation

Reviewer: It might be useful to refer to a real-world example that might lead to this scenario.

Author: sure, @turkenh or @haarchri do you have some better example from the field?

Reviewer 2: Yes, a more complex example would be nice to see, not necessarily a real world example, but at least a bigger toy example would be helpful. I'm not sure how you are envisioning this new API to be used in the context of Compositions. Should users define this new resource as part of their Composition? How will that look like? So users will most probably have to define `Usage` resources as defined by https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane/pull/4215 to achieve deletion ordering and then this new object to define mappings between values? how's that going to look like?

Sometimes the referable value needs to be transformed or constructed from
several other values. `Referable` type can be enriched to support that 
by adding `spec.mapping` block:

```yaml
apiVersion: apiextensions.crossplane.io/v1alpha1
kind: Referable
metadata:
  name: service-url
spec:
  objects:
    - apiVersion: example.com/v1
      kind: Foo
      name: foo
      fieldPath: spec.host
      id: host # optional variable name in template context
    - apiVersion: example.com/v1
      kind: Foo
      name: foo
      fieldPath: spec.port
      id: port # optional variable name in template context
  mapping:
    value: "https://{{ .host }}:{{ .port }}"
```

The used templating engine in `mapping.value` is [Go templates]. Each object 
reference with assigned `id` becomes available under that name in the template context.
A number of useful transformation functions could be made available to that context.

### Advantages

* All referred values are declared on managed resources using already familiar
  mechanism, keeping their discovery simple

> * Value extraction is detached from its consumption, same `Referable` can be
>   used by many multiple manged resources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Value extraction is detached from its consumption. The same `Referable` can be
  used by multiple managed resources
```

* `Referable` instances can be watched and used by non-Crossplane controllers as
  well
* `Referable` instances can be properly garbage collected if owner
  or [`Usage`](https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane/blob/master/design/one-pager-generic-usage-type.md)
  instances are declared
* Multiple objects/fields can be referred as value sources
* Value can be transformed using a Go template

### Disadvantages

> * Providers might need to get read access to `Referable` type

Reviewer: Could we expand on why this is the case?

### Implementation

It consists of two parts:

> * Adding new Crossplane controller for `Referable` type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Adding new Crossplane controller for the `Referable` type
```

> * Update [controller-runtime](https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane-runtime/)
>   to support usage of `Referable` instances

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Update [crossplane-runtime](https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane-runtime/)
  to support usage of `Referable` instances
```

#### Referable Controller

The controller is responsible for:

* Defining proper `Usage` instance to guard against improper deletion
  of `Referable` instances
* Retrieving the declared objects and the field value, based on the provided
  references
* Transforming the value (if requested) and exposing it under `status.value`
* Marking the instance as ready

> We assume currently that the value does not change after it gets exposed.

Reviewer: What would happen if the value changes?

Author: Allowing updates and propagating them to the managed resources is out
of the scope for this proposal version.

> No additional RBAC rules are needed, since Crossplane already poses very broad
> permissions within the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No additional RBAC rules are needed since Crossplane already defines broad
permissions within the cluster.
```

> #### Controller-runtime Changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Crossplane-runtime Changes
```

Is it intentionally meant to be controller-runtime here?

* [APIResolver](https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane-runtime/blob/master/pkg/reference/reference.go#L280)
  should be enriched to support `Referable` instances

> * If additional references need to be declared via `spec.refs` block or
>   annotations, [ResolveReferences function generator](https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane-tools/blob/master/internal/method/resolver.go#L33)
>   should be enriched to support them

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If additional references need to be declared via the `spec.refs` block or
  annotations, the [ResolveReferences function generator](https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane-tools/blob/master/internal/method/resolver.go#L33)
  should be enriched to support them
```

* After fetching values, proper `Usage` instance need to be defined to guard
  against improper deletion

> Finally, providers need to be upgraded to use the new version of controller-runtime 
> and each type `ResolveReference` function needs to be regenerated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, providers need to be upgraded to use the new version of crossplane-runtime 
and for each type, the `ResolveReference` function needs to be regenerated.
```

## Alternatives Considered

> * There is [a previous work on this topic](https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane/pull/2385)  
>   It embeds the schema similar `Referable` type into a number of `spec.patches.fromObject`
>   fields in managed resource. Such approach would require that each provider 
>   has access to broad set of resources (even from other providers), demanding
>   a broad set of RBAC rules. Furthermore, if a certain value transformation is
>   needed on multiple managed resources, it would be required to repeat its 
>   declaration on every MR.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [A previous design](https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane/pull/2385) was proposed for this topic.
  It embeds the schema similar `Referable` type into a number of `spec.patches.fromObject`
  fields in managed resources. Such an approach would require that each provider 
  has access to a broad set of resources (even from other providers), demanding
  a broad set of RBAC rules. Furthermore, if a certain value transformation is
  needed on multiple managed resources, it would be required to repeat its 
  declaration on every MR.
```

> * `Referable` instances could also contain the reference 
>    to destination managed resource and its field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `Referable` instances could also contain the reference 
   to the destination managed resource and its field.
```

>     - Such approach would make the discovery of references for a given manage
>       resource harder

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Such an approach would make the discovery of references for a given managed
      resource harder
```

    - Referable controller logic becomes more complex, because the destination
      managed resource might not exist
    - One more controller can now update a managed resource, increasing
      potential conflict rate
    - `Referable` instance could not be consumed by multiple managed resources
    - However, providers would not need the read access to `Referable` instances

[Cross resource referencing]: https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane/blob/master/design/one-pager-cross-resource-referencing.md

> [Kuberentes API object referemce]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#object-references

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Kubernetes API object reference]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#object-references
```

# Generic Resource References

* Owner: Predrag Knezevic (@pedjak)
* Reviewers: Crossplane Maintainers
* Status: Draft

## Background

Crossplane providers provision and monitor external resources in third party
cloud providers, following the declared specification in the corresponding managed
resources. Very often, creation of these objects cannot happen in parallel, i.e. some
fields can be set only after a given dependency is created.

[Cross resource referencing] solves this problem for majority of cases by
following [Kubernetes API object reference] convention:

```yaml
spec:
  fooRef:
    name: bar
```

Field `spec.fooRef` contains the name of the resource where the value for `spec.foo` is to
be found. The kind of referred resource and the field containing the value used later for

> setting `spec.foo` is determined during compile time.

Reviewer 3: Had to read a lot of what "compile time" means here. From https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane/blob/master/design/one-pager-cross-resource-referencing.md I figure this rather means "specified in provider code".

Author: done.

Although the used convention covers the majority of use cases, it lacks the
following properties:

* The referred object kind and the source field cannot be changed at 

>   runtime for a given object

Reviewer 3: this could be solved by being explicit about the resource rather than resolving with some magic in the background

* The referencer field may not always target a single referred kind. For
  example, a URL field in Route53 could get populated by a URL of an S3 bucket
  or access endpoint of an RDS Instance
* The referencer field may not always target a single field in the referred
  object
* The value that is about to be assigned to the field require some sort of
  transformation

Some of the above issues can be solved by defining a composition. However, there
are cases where one would like to use and refer to a resource not bound by a 

> composite instance.

Reviewer 3: Compositions today mix specification, relationships and orchestration:
1. **specification**: specify how objects look like
2. **relationships**: Patch&Transformations (P&T) establish field level dependencies
3. **orchestration**: P&T is used to define order, both by (a) implicit field dependencies of required fields and (b) by hacks to intentionally break objects or pause objects before some condition is true.

In that light, I would consider the goal of this proposal to promote (2) to the object system, and primarily leave compositions for (1) and (3). This bigger "philosophical" context must be clearer in this doc, maybe in some motivation section.

There is also a connection between (2) and (3a). An asynchronous controller cannot solve the required fields problem, i.e. late initialization. This means that we encourage late initialization more and more. Late initialization has the problem of more states to reason about. Resources will not be completely or correctly specified fromt he beginning, i.e. the creation of the object. This obviously has consequences: less invariants/consistency, less type-safety. 

Is that ^^ a higher level goal? Isn't being more dynamic, less consistent, less type-safety a step into the wrong direction? Thinking about DevEx and "Crossplane is complex".

> __**NOTE**__: [a prior design exists on this topic](https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane/pull/2385).

Reviewer 4: I'll recap my understanding of why we want generic cross-resource references here, since it's relevant to what @muvaf wrote above. I touched on some of this at https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane/issues/1770#issuecomment-1633270957.

The current `spec.forProvider.fooRef` implementation:

1. Requires all possible references to be manually identified and declared at build time.
2. Is inflexible - users can only reference types the provider developers declared, in the ways they declared.
3. Requires the referring provider to import any types they refer to.

3 is of particular interest for provider families, because it creates a potential version dependency between two providers in a family. For example if provider-aws-eks v0.42.0 is compiled against the types from provider-aws-ec2 v0.42.0, there's a chance that installing provider-aws-ec2 v0.50.0 will break references. It would be ideal if there was no version coupling between providers within a family.

## Goals

The generic cross-reference should be able to:

* be configurable at runtime
* use the existing [Kubernetes API object reference] convention 
  as much as possible
* provide alternative convention in cases where [Kubernetes API object reference]
  convention is not suitable
* be implemented without or requiring only light changes in RBAC

> * support referring multiple objects (namespaced and cluster-scoped) and their

Author: My understanding was that it could be useful to set some MR fields from configmaps or secrets. [@muvaf 's](https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane/pull/2385/files) proposal was tackling that as an issue, i.e. good to have. However, if not needed anymore, we can drop that from the proposal.

  fields
* support value transformation before assignment

## Proposal

We would like to introduce a new cluster-scoped `Referable` (alternative name
could be `InjectableValue`) type whose instances declare values that can be

> assigned to an object field:

Reviewer 3: alternative: name it by what these things are namely `FieldReferences`, `ObjectReferences`. Naming something by how it can be used is a little strange.

Reviewer 2: +1

```yaml
apiVersion: apiextensions.crossplane.io/v1alpha1
kind: Referable
metadata:
  name: referable-vpc-id
spec:
  objects:
    - apiVersion: ec2.aws.crossplane.io/v1alpha1
      kind: VPC
      name: main-vpc
      fieldPath: status.atProvider.id
```

> The syntax of the `fieldPath` field is similar to what we

Author: actually, it is the same, like in compositions... gonna fix that.

```yaml
spec:
  vpcIdRef: referable-vpc-id
```

The reference resolver could first try to find the `referable-vpc-id` `VPC` instance, 
and fallback to `referable-vpc-id` `Referable` if the former does not exist. 
If the instance is ready, the value is read from `status.value` and 
set to `spec.vpcId` of the managed resource. Of course, if needed, and if it 
makes more sense, the resolver could first look for the existence of `Referable` 
object first. With that strategy, we would be able to overwrite the referencing
mechanism set at the compile-time.

Referring to a namespaced object would be possible as well:

```yaml
apiVersion: apiextensions.crossplane.io/v1alpha1
kind: Referable
metadata:
  name: region
spec:
  objects:
    - apiVersion: v1
      kind: ConfigMap
      name: common-settings
      namespace: crossplane-system
      fieldPath: data.region
```

or we could match an object with a label selector if its name is unknown or not
static:

```yaml
apiVersion: apiextensions.crossplane.io/v1alpha1
kind: Referable
metadata:
  name: referable-vpc-id
spec:
  objects:
    - apiVersion: ec2.aws.crossplane.io/v1alpha1
      kind: VPC

>       matchingLabels:

Reviewer 5: what happens if multiple objects are selected with labels? Reminds me of https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane/pull/3981 when we thought about similar quite late in the implementation

    - apiVersion: example.com/v1
      kind: Foo
      name: foo
      fieldPath: spec.port
      id: port # optional variable name in template context
  mapping:
    value: "https://{{ .host }}:{{ .port }}"
```

The used templating engine in `mapping.value` is [Go templates]. Each object 
reference with assigned `id` becomes available under that name in the template context.
A number of useful transformation functions could be made available to that context.

### Advantages

* All referred values are declared on managed resources using already familiar
  mechanism, keeping their discovery simple
* Value extraction is detached from its consumption. The same `Referable` can be
  used by multiple managed resources
* `Referable` instances can be watched and used by non-Crossplane controllers as
  well
* `Referable` instances can be properly garbage collected if owner
  or [`Usage`](https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane/blob/master/design/one-pager-generic-usage-type.md)
  instances are declared
* Multiple objects/fields can be referred as value sources
* Value can be transformed using a Go template

### Disadvantages

* Providers might need to get read access to `Referable` type 

>   in order to resolve generic cross-resource references

Author: added to the new version.

  references
* Transforming the value (if requested) and exposing it under `status.value`
* Marking the instance as ready

We assume currently that the value does not change after it gets exposed.
Allowing updates and propagating them to the managed resources is out
of the scope for this proposal version.

No additional RBAC rules are needed, since Crossplane already poses very broad
permissions within the cluster.

#### Crossplane-runtime Changes

* [APIResolver](https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane-runtime/blob/master/pkg/reference/reference.go#L280)
  should be enriched to support `Referable` instances
* If additional references need to be declared via the `spec.refs` block or
  annotations, the [ResolveReferences function generator](https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane-tools/blob/master/internal/method/resolver.go#L33)
  should be enriched to support them
* After fetching values, proper `Usage` instance need to be defined to guard
  against improper deletion

Finally, providers need to be upgraded to use the new version of crossplane-runtime 
and for each type, the `ResolveReference` function needs to be regenerated.

> ## Alternatives Considered

Reviewer 3: - this proposal seems to make the same mistakes that the composition patch and transformation (P&T) has done, and that eventually led to the invention of functions:
  - desirable transformations are open ended and are never enough
  - patching by field paths is a very low-level mechanism, operating on low-level data-type rather than being MR kind aware
  - references don't solve the order problem: (a) no way to order without the MR author having prepared for a reference field (b) dependencies might be more than just a field in an object (think of probes).
- in general, this proposal seems to clone the P&T idea into the object system. Do we really want that? Then the new approach competes with compositions. This is kind of the goal stated in the beginning of the doc. I miss a discussion why this is an acceptable goal, i.e. a motivation section.
- the core motivation behind this proposal seems to be that compositions are too slow (e.g. not watch-driven, but run in 60s interval). Maybe we should fix the latter.

Reviewer 2: +1
This feels like it's adding one more layer of indirection to Compositions and feels overlapping with both the `Usage` resource introduced by https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane/pull/4215 and a little bit with observe only resources too.

Reviewer 6: It would be good to define and agree on the problem before talking about the solution.

Let's take the `VPC` / `Subnet` example. If someone wants to create a `Subnet` in a `VPC` created/managed by XP, they need a mechanism to read the `id` from `VPC` and put it into the `Subnet` spec. Today, this is possible in one of the following two ways:

**a.** Using cross-resource references where they can either use MR name for `VPC` (e.g. `vpcIdRef.name`) or labels/controllerRef (e.g. `vpcIdRef.selector`).
**b.** Using composition patches, but with the following limitations:
  - `VPC` and `Subnet` must exist in the same composition.
  - `id` needs to be patched to XR first, (e.g. `status.vpcId`) and then patched to the `Subnet` (toFieldPath: `spec.forProvider.vpcId`)

Typically, in compositions we see that the option (a) is used with `matchControllerRef` where the `id` of the `VPC` with the same controller ref (owned by the same XR) is extracted and used in `Subnet`:

```
            vpcIdSelector:
              matchControllerRef: true
```

Then, what is wrong? There are two problems invalidating both of the available options as such:

**option (a):** Not every MR field directly maps to a single type, so existing XRR falls short. There are a lot of issue references in the [original ticket](https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane/issues/1770), but one example is the `destinationArn` on a `SubscriptionFilter` resource where destination could be one of the [multiple types](https://github.com/upbound/upjet/issues/95#issuecomment-1487739037).
**option (b):** Resources may not be part of the same composite.

So, we need a solution here. If someone creates a `SubscriptionFilter` and a `DeliveryStream` (using the [same example](https://github.com/upbound/upjet/issues/95#issuecomment-1487739037)) with Crossplane but not necessarily within the same composition, they need a way to fill `spec.forProvider.destinationArn` on `SubscriptionFilter` with the arn of the `DeliveryStream` they intend to. 

> this proposal seems to make the same mistakes that the composition patch and transformation (P&T) has done, and that eventually led to the invention of functions:

I agree that the problem we're trying to solve here is **similar** to what (P&T) has done, but there is that fundamental difference that makes it impossible to solve with compositions or functions, which is `resources may not be part of the same composite`. I can see two ways to overcome this, both with some implications:

- If you want to patch from a resource that is not part of the same composition, define an `ObserveOnly` resource in the same composition and patch from it.
- Functions could access to k8s API and read anything it wants without being limited to `observed` state.

> desirable transformations are open ended and are never enough

Yes. While we lack very basics today, like _take that ARN and put it here_, it would eventually need more and more, just like we see in composition patches. Leveraging and relying on some [external](https://jmespath.org/),[tool](https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane/issues/4351) might help here.

> references don't solve the order problem: (a) no way to order without the MR author having prepared for a reference field (b) dependencies might be more than just a field in an object (think of probes).

I am not aware of a real (creation) ordering problem today where we are good enough with eventual consistency.
We had the deletion ordering problem and tackling it with the `Usage` type. 
I am not claiming it will not complicate anything but we can still stay on the "declarative" world by saying, _this value needs to be constructed this way and eventually patched there._

> in general, this proposal seems to clone the P&T idea into the object system. Do we really want that?

Not sure if the solution should be the one proposed here, but we need a solution to the problem defined above.

> the core motivation behind this proposal seems to be that compositions are too slow (e.g. not watch-driven, but run in 60s interval). Maybe we should fix the latter.

Not sure how you came up with this assumption, but I am not aware of such a motivation for Generic XRR. IIRC, compositions not being watch-driven came up recently in the composition function (re)design; however, Generic XRR has been an [open issue](https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane/issues/1770) for more than 2 years. One can claim that, if we could live without it for 2 years, then maybe it is not that an important problem to solve :) I would love to hear from the community on that, and I believe it is not a blocker mostly because there are workaround/hacks there which could unblock use cases but ultimately complicate things further.

Reviewer 7: I'd like to add a slightly different perspective based on my experience using `EnvironmentConfigs`.  I think there is a fair amount of overlap in the usage scenarios, and for me personally the `EnvironemtConfig` model is simpler and easier to understand and use than any of the other proposals for separate resource references that I have seen.

One of the common use cases we have found for `EnvironmentConfig` is making information available from one Composite to another.  If Composite A creates a set of resources and wants to make some information regarding those resources available to any other Composite/Composition that may need them, it can create an `EnvironmentConfig` object with the appropriate labels and the information to be "published".  Other Composites can retrieve these `EnvironmentConfigs` as needed in their Compositions using the appropriate label selectors.

The process of finding the appropriate `EnvironmentConfigs` and loading them into the Composition `environment` creates what is essentially a runtime context for that Composite.  The user (composition author) can leverage this context to pass information between resources and can reference external data using `EnvironmentConfigs`.  The structure of the local context is defined by the author and information is placed in specific locations by name.  This model works extremely well and provides necessary functionality.

So why limit the `environment` external data references to EnvironmentConfigs?  Why not allow the `environment` specification to include references to any existing Kubernetes object, which can be retrieved by the same mechanism that resolves EnvironmentConfigs today?  If an author wants to retrieve data from an existing XR or MR or ConfigMap or Secret they could specify the G/V/K information required to find the object along with a name or label selector,  and a path within the object to the data they want, and that information can be populated in the `environment` in the specified location.

From the author's perspective this would let me put all of my external data references in one place, and they can be retrieved dynamically at runtime as needed if they exist, or they can eventually reconcile as they become available.

I think one of the overarching goals needs to be keeping the user experience as simple as possible, and requiring a specific resource definition for every reference feels like it is adding complexity for the user and making the composition more difficult to develop and maintain.

Reviewer 4: Per https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane/issues/1770#issuecomment-1627868262 I share the concern that generic references grows to be something like P&T Composition.

Also, per https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane/issues/1770#issuecomment-1633270957 I'm pretty confident that today's hardcoded style of references isn't going to scale. It's too manual to support, too inflexible for users, and creates a coupling between providers when one provider references a type defined by another.

I could be convinced that the answer is to just not have MR-level references at all if we can find a clean way to address this at the Composition level. I would expect such an approach to be controversial though. I suspect there's a not-insignificant amount of folks who don't use Composition today who would be forced to if Composition was the only way to derive one

Author: > I could be convinced that the answer is to just not have MR-level references at all if we can find a clean way to address this at the Composition level. I would expect such an approach to be controversial though. I suspect there's a not-insignificant amount of folks who don't use Composition today who would be forced to if Composition was the only way to derive one

This proposal talks about that path as well. No matter what strategy/convention we would like to apply to MR-level reference, at the end of the day, it needs to be implemented by providers. On the other hand, solving the problem via compositions requires no changes at provider side.

# Generic Resource References

* Owner: Predrag Knezevic (@pedjak)

> * Reviewers: Crossplane Maintainers

Reviewer 4: Let's nominate two specific Crossplane maintainers to make it clear who we expect to approve this design.

Author: @crossplane/crossplane-maintainers please your hand :)

Reviewer 7: Count me in

object of arbitrary kind. For example, 
[`datasync.aws.upbound.io` `Task`](https://github.com/upbound/provider-aws/blob/main/apis/datasync/v1beta1/zz_task_types.go#L375)
has [`spec.forProvider.sourceLocationArn`](https://github.com/upbound/provider-aws/blob/main/apis/datasync/v1beta1/zz_task_types.go#L359)
field that can obtain value from an instance of the following object types:

* LocationS3
* LocationSmb
* LocationObjectStorage
* LocationNfs
* LocationHdfs
* LocationFsxWindowsFileSystem
* LocationFsxOpenzfsFileSytem
* LocationFsxLustreFileSystem
* LocationEfs

However, [the implemented provider resolving mechanism](https://github.com/upbound/provider-aws/blob/main/apis/datasync/v1beta1/zz_generated.resolvers.go#L104-L112)
looks only for the value in `LocationS3` instance named
by `spec.forProvider.sourceLocationArnRef` field.

Currently, the issue can be solved by defining the following composition:

* Declare under managed resources the needed source object (one of `Location*`)
  types with [observe only management policy]
* Patch composite object with the value from the source object
* Patch Task's `spec.forProvider.sourceLocationArn` field with the composite
  value

> The proposed solution has the following drawbacks:

Reviewer 4: Making sure I understand: by "the proposed solution" do you mean the pattern you describe above that requires using a Composition?

Reviewer 7: I would rephrase it as "this solution" so it's clear what it is referring to.

  fields. In a system with a high number of claims, that would put additional
  pressure on k8s API and etcd.
* Composite object needs to expose the patched value, although fully unneeded
  from API design perspective

__**NOTE**__: [a prior design exists on this topic](https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane/pull/2385).

## Goals

The generic cross-reference should be able to:

* Refer a value on an arbitrary path within an object of arbitrary kind
* Use the existing [Kubernetes API object reference] convention as much as
  possible
* Be implementable without or requiring only light changes in RBAC

In cases when the generic cross-references are unavailable for a given managed
resource field, our compositions should not require declaring observe-only
resource, for sole purpose of referring a value.

## Proposal

Until now, providers were supporting only reference fields of
type [`Reference`](https://github.com/pedjak/crossplane-runtime/blob/master/apis/common/v1/resource.go#L116-L123):

```go
type Reference struct {
// Name of the referenced object.
Name string `json:"name"`

// Policies for referencing.
// +optional

> Policy *Policy `json:"policy,omitempty"`

Reviewer 4: Out of scope for this design, but FYI the presence of this field is a bit of a problem - see https://github.com/crossplane/crossplane-runtime/issues/440.

}
```

### GenericReference Type

We would like to introduce `GenericReference` field type:

```go
type GenericReference struct {
  Reference
  
  // ApiVersion of the referenced object.
  ApiVersion string `json:"apiVersion"`
  
  // Kind of the referenced object.
  Kind string `json:"kind"`
  
  // FieldPath of the value within the referenced object.
  FieldPath string `json:"fieldPath"`
}
```

The syntax of the `fieldPath` field is the one used in Composition, in line with
the [Kubernetes API Conventions on field selection].

Reference fields of the above type describe completely the location of 
the value that is about to be set on the counterpart field. In case of 
`datasync.aws.upbound.io` `Task`, an instance might look like:

```yaml
apiVersion: datasync.aws.upbound.io/v1beta1
kind: Task
metadata:
  name: datasync-task-example
spec:
  forProvider:
    .
    .

>     sourceLocationArnRef:

Reviewer 4: Does this mean that provider developers still need to explicitly identify and declare what fields can be set by a reference at build time? For example here the developer would need to identify that `sourceLocationArn` could reference another type, and thus make sure `sourceLocationArnRef` existed.

Author: > Does this mean that provider developers still need to explicitly identify and declare what fields can be set by a reference at build time? For example here the developer would need to identify that sourceLocationArn could reference another type, and thus make sure sourceLocationArnRef existed.

My understanding so far (and chatting with @muvaf) is that we have automated that with Upjet, but I could be ofcourse wrong here.

Reviewer 4: > My understanding so far (and chatting with @muvaf) is that we have automated that with Upjet, but I could be ofcourse wrong here.

I thought we'd automated _generating the code_ for references, but not automated the process of _identifying which fields can be set using a reference_. It's possible I'm wrong too though - CC @ulucinar and @muvaf.

Either way though, I suspect only being able to use references for certain fields will be too limiting. If a field can reference an arbitrary type, how would we know at development which fields should be able to be set by a reference and which can't? Do we think that we'll be able to predict all the fields users might want to derive using a reference at provider development time?

Author: > Either way though, I suspect only being able to use references for certain fields will be too limiting. If a field can reference an arbitrary type, how would we know at development which fields should be able to be set by a reference and which can't? Do we think that we'll be able to predict all the fields users might want to derive using a reference at provider development time?

My understanding is that providers generated with the help of Upjet have mapped all fields that can reference external values, correct @ulucinar? These fields are all visible in MR schemas, hence easy discoverable for consumers. Other, non-upjet based providers needs to references in their MR schema in some way as well.

@haarchri, how is your experience? Did you stumble across some fields that should be referable, but they are not according to MR schema?

Reviewer 6: Alper can correct me if I am wrong, but AFAIK, upjet infers some of those references by parsing their documentation and the examples there but not all. For unidentified ones, it is still a manual process to configure them.

Reviewer 8: Yes, correct:
> My understanding is that providers generated with the help of Upjet have mapped all fields that can reference external values, correct @ulucinar?

We attempt to deduce the reference parameters from the examples provided in the Terraform docs and this does *not* result in the generation of all reference parameters. For instance, none of the provided example Terraform configurations could be utilizing a possible reference. We do not attempt to parse the argument documentation for this purpose, only the provided HCL configurations are used.

Thus, we have some automation for determining the reference parameters themselves on top of the reference implementation generator in angryjet. But, it's not 100% reliable, optional (an upjet-based provider's maintainer can opt out not to generate the reference parameters) and to the best of my knowledge, is only applicable for upjet-based providers.

@negz, are you suggesting a referencing scheme where, at runtime, we can declare a reference whose source & target are arbitrary (no a priori knowledge about who can reference what), so that at build time, we don't need to know anything about the references?

My understanding is that the proposed approach here makes the reference source (where the data will copied from) dynamic (GVK+name+fieldpath) but the reference target (where the data will be copied into) is still static, i.e., you need to know the target at build time.

  MatchLabels map[string]string `json:"matchLabels,omitempty"`
  
  // Policies for selection.
  // +optional
  Policy *Policy `json:"policy,omitempty"`
  
  // ApiVersion of the referenced object.
  ApiVersion string `json:"apiVersion"`
  
  // Kind of the referenced object.
  Kind string `json:"kind"`
  
  // FieldPath of the value within the referenced object.
  FieldPath string `json:"fieldPath"`
}
```

so that one can reference the external object when its name is
unknown/irrelevant:

```yaml
apiVersion: datasync.aws.upbound.io/v1beta1
kind: Task
metadata:
  name: datasync-task-example
spec:
  forProvider:
    .
    .
    sourceLocationArnSelector:
      matchLabels:
        foo: bar
      apiVersion: datasync.aws.upbound.io/v1beta1
      kind: LocationS3
      fieldPath: metadata.annotations[crossplane.io/external-name]
```

Although the proposed solution sounds like a natural evolution of the existing
reference mechanism, its adoption would require that:

* Providers implement the support for it.
* RBAC permissions need to be relaxed, if provider `A` needs to refer values from
  instances owned by provider `B`. In case of provider families, each provider has

>   enough rights to access all resources within the family, requiring no changes

Reviewer 8: I wonder if enterprise users may ask for fine-granular access policies in the future. Currently, access is mutually granted to the (service accounts of the) providers A & B, if A & B are in the same family, even if their MRs are not supposed to refer to each other. This's been a natural evolution from the monoliths.

  in RBAC rules. Adding new rules should be done at deployment, by tweaking RBAC
  rules for the given provider service account.

### Referable Type

> If adding a number of RBAC rules is not an option for users, cross-provider

Reviewer 8: If I understand this correctly:
- There exists a cross-provider resource reference A->B (a resource in provider A references a resource in provider B)
- Because it's cross-provider, the Crossplane RBAC manager cannot install the rules that will allow A's service account to read B's resources
- The user is not willing to add the RBAC rules herself
- Instead provisions a `Referable` object
- The `Referable` controller is running as a core Crossplane controller and has read access to B's resources: Do we assume here source GVK will be a managed resource?
- `Referable` controller exposes the extracted value in `status` or reports an error if the extraction fails for some reason
- All installed provider's service accounts have read access to all the `Referable` objects in the cluster
- Provider A copies the data from the `Referable` object via a `GenericReference`

So this will allow data transfer across all MRs in the cluster. Do I understand this correctly?

        selector:
          matchLabels:
            foo: bar
          apiVersion: datasync.aws.upbound.io/v1beta1
          kind: LocationS3
          fromFieldPath: metadata.annotations[crossplane.io/external-name]
          toFieldPath: source.location # path where the value is inserted into the environment

  resources:
  # Removed for Brevity
```

After initializing the environment, an appropriate patch & transformation
strategy can be applied to set managed resource fields.

__**Out of proposal scope**__: renaming `environmentConfigs` field to something
more generic, e.g. `sources`.

### Advantages

* All referred values are still declared on managed resources using already
  familiar mechanism
* Optional `Referable` instances can be watched and used by non-Crossplane controllers as
  well
* Avoid system pollution with [observe only management policy] objects
* Using compositions, reference could be set even if provider does not support
  the proposed reference mechanism

### Disadvantages

* Support for `Referable` type requires new controller on Crossplane side
* Provider RBAC rules should be extended to include read permission 
  for `Referable` type

> * Providers needs to support the new reference mechanism on their side

Reviewer 8: Maybe I'm missing this: How can custom transformation/extraction logic on the data path from source to target be handled? We are preserving the `reference.ResolutionRequest.Extract`, right? This proposal is mainly for making the reference target dynamic and rest of the data path is (mostly) untouched?
